Add NEON-SVE Bridge (#72)
ARM-software/acle: main/design_documents/ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE.rst

=======================================
Design Document for ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE
=======================================

This document describes the design of the intrinsics defined in the ("NEON_SVE bridge")

> <../acle.rst#_ssec-NEONSVEBridge>. These intrinics add a

Author: After a quick playaround i've not managed to get this to link to `.. _ssec-NEONSVEBridge:` at line 411 in `main/acle.rst`

Reviewer: Github does not use the internal hyperlink names, but has it's own convention: https://github.com/MDevereau/acle/blob/next-release/main/acle.rst#neon-sve-bridge 

```suggestion
<../acle.rst#-neon-sve-brige>. These intrinsics add a
```

(mind a typo too)

convienient way to use NEON and SVE vectors interchangeably in C code with
no performance overhead.

Location
########

The intrinsics will be in a new header file called ``arm_extensions_bridge.h``.

They will be conditionally defined with
``#define __ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE (__ARM_FEATURE_NEON && __ARM_FEATURE_SVE)``.
``__ARM_FEATURE_NEON`` is used as it is aarch64 specific, and SVE is not
supported in the aarch32 state.

Including this header file will define ``__ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE`` as 1.

Suggestions & Considerations
############################

Why not enable the extraction of any 128-bit subvector in an SVE vector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Extracting other 128-bit subvectors would go against the no-op design.
There are currently other methods of getting data this way from SVE

> subvectors using SVE intrinsics.

Reviewer 2: Could you add an example of how to extract another 128-bit segment from an SVE vector? I am assuming the ideal codegen here would be `MOV <Zd>.<T>, <Zn>.<T>[<imm>]` but can't think of a sequence that would produce this off the top of my head?

Author: `svdupq_lane_s8(x, 1);` compiles to `mov     z0.q, z0.q[1]` on the head of llvm

Why not include 64-bit Vectors?
-------------------------------

64-bit vectors will not initially be added. The naming scheme of the intrinsics
must respect possible future 64-bit additions. Following the NEON naming 

> convention, e.g. ``svget_neonq[_u16]`` and ``svset_neonq[_u16]`` resolves this.

Reviewer 2: I believe the `q` part of the name could also be inferred from the argument even in the presence of a future 64-bit vector extension? Don't have a strong preference for making it implicit or not, just pointing out that it is possible.

Author: I'm updating the spec to expand on this. Basically C generics can't infer 64/128 bits from the return type alone (only the parameters) so the function name needs to reflect this

=======================================
Design Document for ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE
=======================================

> This document proposes a new set of intrinsics. These intrinics add a

Author: done

=======================================
Design Document for ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE
=======================================

This document describes the design of the intrinsics defined in the ("NEON_SVE bridge")
<../acle.rst#neon-sve-bridge>. These intrinsics add a
convienient way to use NEON and SVE vectors interchangeably in C code with
no performance overhead.

Location
########

The intrinsics will be in a new header file called ``arm_extensions_bridge.h``.

This header file will define ``__ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE`` as 1.

The intrinsics will be conditionally defined with

.. code:: c

    #if !defined(__ARM_FEATURE_NEON) || !defined(__ARM_FEATURE_SVE)

>         #error "arm_extensions_bridge.h requires -march=+simd+sve"

Reviewer 3: Missing the #endif?

Author: whoops. sorted

=======================================
Design Document for ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE
=======================================

This document describes the design of the intrinsics defined in the ("NEON_SVE bridge")
<../acle.rst#neon-sve-bridge>. These intrinsics add a

> convienient way to use NEON and SVE vectors interchangeably in C code with

Reviewer 3: On a strict reading of this, you cannot interchange an SVE and a NEON register in an arbitrary context, so I think you intend to write something different here.
```suggestion
convienient way to convert between NEON and SVE vectors in C code with
```

Author: done

no performance overhead.

Location
########

The intrinsics will be in a new header file called ``arm_extensions_bridge.h``.

This header file will define ``__ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE`` as 1.

The intrinsics will be conditionally defined with

.. code:: c

    #if !defined(__ARM_FEATURE_NEON) || !defined(__ARM_FEATURE_SVE)

>         #error "arm_extensions_bridge.h requires -march=+simd+sve"

Reviewer 2: Not sure this is the right error to give here. Trying to use this option with GCC gives `cc1: error: missing arch name in '-march=+simd+sve'`. Clang gives `clang-13: error: the clang compiler does not support '-march=+simd+sve'`.

Author: `requires -march=armv8-a+simd+sve`?

Author: If Neon support is mandatory in AArch64 I wonder if theres any point in me asserting against `__ARM_FEATURE_NEON` anywhere at all

Author: ```
int main(){
#ifdef __ARM_FEATURE_NEON
        printf("neon enabled\n");
#endif
#ifdef __ARM_FEATURE_SVE
        printf("sve enabled\n");
#endif
        return 0;
}
```
Compiling the above with the trunk of clang with `-march=armv8-a+simd+sve` only outputs `sve enabled`... interesting

Author: I'm guessing i should just be using `__ARM_NEON` then?

Reviewer 3: > If Neon support is mandatory in AArch64 I wonder if theres any point in me asserting against `__ARM_FEATURE_NEON` anywhere at all

Good thought - it's difficult to imagine a scenario where the NEON feature is disabled but SVE is enabled, so I believe testing for SVE should be sufficient.

Author: There's still the problem that SVE doesn't bring in neon types and we still need to be sure we have the neon types defined when we include this file

Reviewer 3: I thought the intent was to resolve that issue by forward declaring the neon types?

Author: https://github.com/ARM-software/acle/pull/72#discussion_r740912334 we mentioned it here but didnt explicitly agree on it. From that conversation I was under the impression we were checking the `__ARM_FEATURE` macros to ensure the types had already been defined

Reviewer 3: Ah, last I saw (and we discussed), you said 'forward declaring the types is probably the best bet' which sounded good to me, since it makes the order of includes not matter, which is important in the face of tools which might reorder the headers and helps with the principle of least surprise for users. I'll replied there too.

    #endif
    #define __ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE 1
    //define intrinsics

> `__ARM_FEATURE_NEON` is used as it is aarch64 specific, and SVE is not

Reviewer 2: Capitalisation: "AArch64" / "AArch32"?

Author: done

supported in the aarch32 state.

Suggestions & Considerations
############################

Why not enable the extraction of any 128-bit subvector in an SVE vector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Extracting other 128-bit subvectors would go against the no-op design.

> This functionality is already possible with the ACLE intrinsic `svdupq_lane`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This functionality is already available with the ACLE intrinsic `svdupq_lane`.
```

Author: done

> Why not include 64-bit Vectors?

Reviewer 3: The question is not directly answered (the "why") by the below paragraph.

Author: The direct answer is just that there isn't enough interest currently right?

Reviewer 3: Yes.

=======================================
Design Document for ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE
=======================================

This document describes the design of the intrinsics defined in
("NEON_SVE bridge")<../acle.rst#neon-sve-bridge>. These C intrinsics enable the
conversion between NEON and SVE vectors with no performance overhead, and
duplicating NEON vectors across SVE vectors.

Location
########

> The intrinsics will be defined in a new header file called 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The intrinsics is be defined in a header file called 
```

``arm_neon_sve_bridge.h``.

> This header file will include ``arm_neon.h`` and ``arm_sve.h``.
> It will also define ``__ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE`` as 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This header file includes ``arm_neon.h`` and ``arm_sve.h``.
It also defines ``__ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE`` as 1.
```

> The intrinsics will be defined with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The intrinsics are defined with:
```

.. code:: c

    #ifdef __ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE 1
    //define intrinsics

Suggestions & Considerations
############################

Why not enable the extraction of any 128-bit subvector in an SVE vector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Extracting other 128-bit subvectors would go against the no-op design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extracting other 128-bit subvectors goes against the no-op design.
```

This functionality is already available with the ACLE intrinsic 
``svdupq_lane``. For example:

``svuint64_t sve_vector_a = ...;``

``uint64x2_t neon_vec = svget_neonq_u64(svdupq_lane_u64(sve_vector_a, 1));``

Why not enable the insertion of a 128-bit NEON vector into a specific SVE subvector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This behaviour is not currently available with SVE intrinsics. Such an intrinsic

> would be better placed in the SVE specification. NEON/SVE Bridge only concerns 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is better placed in the SVE specification. NEON/SVE Bridge only concerns 
```

bridging NEON and SVE functionality.

Why not include 64-bit Vectors?
-------------------------------

Support for 64-bit vectors is not added because of low interest. The
naming scheme is designed to cope with the possibility of supporting these in
the future. The C standard requires a unique function name for each set of
input and return types from these functions. C Generics enable inferring the
intended function from its parameter types, but not from the return type.
Therefore we adopt the NEON convention of using the letter `q` in the name to
indicate a 128-bit vector in the return type. e.g. ``svget_neonq[_u16]``. If
64-bit vectors are added later they will omit the `q`.

Intrinsic Naming
----------------

> The intrinsics will be named ``svset_neonq``, ``svget_neonq`` and
> ``svdup_neonq``. These names are taken from ``svget/svset[2|3|4]``. and 
> ``svdupq``. The ``q`` is from the NEON 64/128 bit naming convention.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The intrinsics are named ``svset_neonq``, ``svget_neonq`` and
``svdup_neonq``. These names are taken from ``svget/svset[2|3|4]``. and 
``svdupq`` from the SVE ACLE specifications. The ``q`` is from the NEON 64/128 bit naming convention of the NEON intrinsics.
```
Please add a link to the specs and double check their official name:
1. SVE ACLE: https://developer.arm.com/documentation/100987/
2. NEON intrinsics: https://github.com/ARM-software/acle/tree/main/neon_intrinsics

Author: .rst links or github links?

Reviewer: rst, the syntax should be `text <URL>`_

=======================================
Design Document for ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE
=======================================

This document describes the design of the intrinsics defined in

> ("NEON_SVE bridge")<../acle.rst#neon-sve-bridge>. These C intrinsics enable the

Reviewer: Sorry, the linkin this line seems to be broken (see https://github.com/MDevereau/acle/blob/next-release/main/design_documents/ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE.rst#design-document-for-arm_neon_sve_bridge).

I *think* you might want to replace it with the following one:
```suggestion
`NEON_SVE bridge <../acle.rst#neon-sve-bridge>`_. These C intrinsics enable the
```

Please double check it works by browsing the rendering at https://github.com/MDevereau/acle/blob/next-release/main/design_documents/ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE.rst#design-document-for-arm_neon_sve_bridge

conversion between NEON and SVE vectors with no performance overhead, and
duplicating NEON vectors across SVE vectors.

Location
########

The intrinsics are defined in a header file called 
``arm_neon_sve_bridge.h``.

This header file includes ``arm_neon.h`` and ``arm_sve.h``.

> It also defines ``__ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE`` as 1.

Reviewer 4: Would need to be updated if we do change how this macro is defined.

Author: done.

The intrinsics are defined with:

.. code:: c

    #ifdef __ARM_NEON_SVE_BRIDGE 1
    //define intrinsics

Suggestions & Considerations
############################

Why not enable the extraction of any 128-bit subvector in an SVE vector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Extracting other 128-bit subvectors goes against the no-op design.
This functionality is already available with the ACLE intrinsic 
``svdupq_lane``. For example:

``svuint64_t sve_vector_a = ...;``

``uint64x2_t neon_vec = svget_neonq_u64(svdupq_lane_u64(sve_vector_a, 1));``

Why not enable the insertion of a 128-bit NEON vector into a specific SVE subvector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> This behaviour is not currently available with SVE intrinsics. Such an

Reviewer 4: For me, the justification is more along the lines:

> `arm_sve.h` does not currently provide any intrinsics for inserting individual elements into a specific lane of an SVE vector.  The approach should be consistent between `arm_sve.h` and `arm_neon_sve_bridge.h`.

That is, if we _did_ provide methods for inserting both individual elements and whole NEON vectors, I think the latter _would_ belong in `arm_neon_sve_bridge.h` rather than `arm_sve.h`.  But I don't think it makes sense to provide functions for whole NEON vectors when no corresponding functions exist for individual elements.

I think the nop design justification applies here too, but it's probably not worth repeating.

Author: done

elements into a specific lane of an SVE vector. The approach should be

> consistent between arm_sve.h and arm_neon_sve_bridge.h

Reviewer 3: Nit: elsewhere these header files (across the above three lines) appear in double backticks.

Why not include 64-bit Vectors?
-------------------------------

Support for 64-bit vectors is not added because of low interest. The
naming scheme is designed to cope with the possibility of supporting these in
the future. The C standard requires a unique function name for each set of
input and return types from these functions. C Generics enable inferring the
intended function from its parameter types, but not from the return type.
Therefore we adopt the NEON convention of using the letter `q` in the name to
indicate a 128-bit vector in the return type. e.g. ``svget_neonq[_u16]``. If
64-bit vectors are added later they will omit the `q`.

NEON Vector duplication across all SVE vectors
----------------------------------------------

``svdup_neonq`` is added as a convenience function to avoid casting from

> NEON to SVE as a seperate step when duplicating NEON vectors into SVE vectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NEON to SVE as a separate step when duplicating NEON vectors into SVE vectors.
```

> ``svdup_neonq`` also prevents initializing none NEON bits in an SVE vector

Reviewer 4: s/none NEON/non-NEON/

Author: done

Why not enable the insertion of a 128-bit NEON vector into a specific SVE subvector?
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

arm_sve.h does not currently provide any intrinsics for inserting individual
elements into a specific lane of an SVE vector. The approach should be
consistent between ``arm_sve.h`` and ``arm_neon_sve_bridge.h``

Why not include 64-bit Vectors?
-------------------------------

Support for 64-bit vectors is not added because of low interest. The
naming scheme is designed to cope with the possibility of supporting these in
the future. The C standard requires a unique function name for each set of
input and return types from these functions. C Generics enable inferring the
intended function from its parameter types, but not from the return type.
Therefore we adopt the NEON convention of using the letter `q` in the name to
indicate a 128-bit vector in the return type. e.g. ``svget_neonq[_u16]``. If
64-bit vectors are added later they will omit the `q`.

Why not shuffle the vector bits for big-endian?
-----------------------------------------------

> Copying vectors bit-for-bit as a Q vector rather than lane-for-lane is safer
> by default for setting, getting and duping. Users requiring lane-shuffling can
> then shuffle the bits as required. Shuffling bridge intrinsics can be added if
> enough interest is shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copying vectors bit-for-bit as a Q vector rather than lane-for-lane is safer
by default for setting, getting and duplicating lanes. Users requiring lane-shuffling can
then shuffle the bits as required. Shuffling bridge intrinsics can be added if
enough interest is shown.
```
